Add blog post for OTel Operator Q&A (#4359)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/otel-operator-q-and-a/index.md

---
title: OTel Operator Q&A
linkTitle: OTel Operator Q&A
date: 2024-04-24
author: >-
  [Adriana Villela](https://github.com/avillela) (ServiceNow),

canonical_url: https://adri-v.medium.com/81d63addbf92?
cSpell:ignore: automagically mycollector
---

> ![Seattle's Mount Rainier rising about the clouds, as seen from an airplane. Photo by Adriana Villela](mount-rainier.jpg)

Reviewer: Love the picture, though I think there's little point in having it here — on Medium it's a different matter.

Reviewer 2: Let's keep it

The
[OpenTelemetry (OTel) Operator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator)
is a
[Kubernetes Operator](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/)

> that manages OTel things for you in your Kubernetes cluster to make life a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that manages OTel for you in your Kubernetes cluster to make your life a
```

Unless we can specify what "things" are.

Author: I've added that to the post. BTW, I'm a maintainer on the End User SIG, so if you'd like us to work with you to get community feedback on the Operator, let me know! We can run surveys and end user panels.

little easier. It does the following:

> - Manages deployment of the

Author: Derp. Can't believe I missed this biggie, considering that I talk about it later on. :)

  [OpenTelemetry Collector](http://localhost:1313/docs/collector/), supported by
  the
  [`OpenTelemetryCollector`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#getting-started)

>   [custom resource (CR)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [custom resource (CR)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/).
```

- Manages the configuration of a fleet of OpenTelemetry Collectors via
  [OpAMP](/docs/specs/opamp/) integration, supported by the
  [`OpAMPBridge`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opampbridge)

>   custom resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  custom resource.
```

- Injects and configures
  [auto-instrumentation](https://www.honeycomb.io/blog/what-is-auto-instrumentation)
  into your pods, supported by the
  [`Instrumentation`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-injection)

>   custom resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  custom resource.
```

I've had a chance to use the Operator in the last year, and learned some pretty
cool things, so I thought it might be helpful to share some little OTel Operator
goodies that I’ve picked up along the way, in the form of a Q&A.

Please note that this post assumes that you have some familiarity with
OpenTelemetry, the
[OpenTelemetry Collector](http://localhost:1313/docs/collector/), the
[OpenTelemetry Operator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator)

> (including the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
including the
```

[Target Allocator](https://adri-v.medium.com/prometheus-opentelemetry-better-together-41dc637f2292)),
and [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io).

## Q&A

### Q1: Does the Operator support multiple Collector configuration sources?

> Short answer: no.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Short answer: No.
```

Longer answer: OTel Collector can be fed more than one Collector config YAML

> file. That way, you can keep your base configurations in say,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file. That way, you can keep your base configurations in, say,
```

`otelcol-config.yaml`, and overrides or additions to the base configuration can

> go in say, `otelcol-config-extras.yaml`. You can see an example of this in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
go in, for example, `otelcol-config-extras.yaml`. See an example of this in the
```

[OTel Demo’s Docker compose file](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/blob/06f020c97f78ae9625d3a4a5d1107c55045c567f/docker-compose.yml#L665-L668).

Unfortunately, while the OTel Collector supports multiple Collector
configuration files, the Collector managed by the OTel Operator does not.

To get around this, you could merge the multiple Collector configs through some
external tool beforehand. For example, if you
[were deploying the Operator via Helm](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/tree/main/charts/opentelemetry-operator),
you could technically
[pass it multiple Collector config files using multiple --values flags](https://stackoverflow.com/a/56653384)
and let [Helm](https://helm.sh) do the merging for you.

For reference,
[check out this thread in the #otel-operator CNCF Slack channel](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C033BJ8BASU/p1709321896612279).

> ### Q2: How can I securely reference access tokens in the OpenTelemetryCollector’s configuration?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Q2: How can I securely reference access tokens in the Collector’s configuration?
```

[some proprietary vendor format](/docs/specs/otel/protocol/), most exporters
typically require that you specify an endpoint and an access token when sending
data to a vendor backend.

When using the OpenTelemetry Operator to manage the OTel Collector, the OTel
Collector config YAML is defined in the
[OpenTelemetryCollector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#getting-started)
CR. This file should be version-controlled and therefore shouldn’t contain any
sensitive data, including access tokens stored as plain text.

Fortunately, the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR gives us a way to reference that
value as a secret. Here’s how you do it:

1- Create a Kubernetes secret for your access token. Remember to
[base-64 encode](https://www.base64encode.org/) the secret.

2-
[Expose the secret as an environment variable](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#using-a-secret)
by adding it to the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR’s
[`env` section](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/21e9643e28165e39bd79f3beec7f2b1f989d87e9/src/resources/02-otel-collector-ls.yml#L16-L21).
For example:

```yaml
env:

>   - name: LS_TOKEN

Reviewer 4: Same here

    valueFrom:
      secretKeyRef:
        key: LS_TOKEN
        name: otel-collector-secret
```

3- Reference the environment variable in your
[exporter definition](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/21e9643e28165e39bd79f3beec7f2b1f989d87e9/src/resources/02-otel-collector-ls.yml#L43-L47):

```yaml
exporters:
  otlp/ls:

>     endpoint: 'ingest.lightstep.com:443'

Reviewer 5: Would it be too picky to ask this value to be made more generic? Like, `backend.example.com` as the hostname, and `THE_TOKEN` as the token env var?

Author: Absoulely fair ask. I've made the changes :)

    headers:
      'lightstep-access-token': '${LS_TOKEN}'
```

> For more info, check out my full example

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should also mention authentication option in the exporter?  
Not sure if its worth to mention, but in case you use some auth container that writes such token into a file, there is the bearer token auth ext. that can be used to watch the file and set the header.

Author: @frzifus TBH I don't know that I would be qualified to talk about this, just because I've never played around with the authentication option in the exporter.

[here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/02-otel-collector-ls.yml),
along with full instructions
[here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#3b--kubernetes-deployment-servicenow-cloud-observability-backend).

### Q3: Is the Operator version at parity with the Collector version?

> The default version of the Collector used by the Operator is typically behind by

Author: I like this wording better. Updated.

(as opposed to the contrib distribution).

### Q4: Can I override the base OTel Collector image?

Yes! In fact,
[you probably should](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C033BJ8BASU/p1713894678225579)!

As we saw earlier, the
[core distribution](https://github.cm/open-telemetry/open-telemetry-collector)
is the default Collector distribution used by the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR.
The Core distribution is a bare-bones distribution of the Collector for OTel
developers to develop and test. It contains a base set of components–i.e.
[extensions](/docs/collector/configuration/#service-extensions),
[connectors](/docs/collector/configuration/#connectors),
[receivers](/docs/collector/configuration/#receivers),
[processors](/docs/collector/configuration/#processors), and
[exporters](/docs/collector/configuration/#exporters).

If you want access to more components than the ones offered by core, you can use
the contrib distribution instead. The contrib distribution extends the core
distribution, and includes components created by third-parties (including
vendors and individual community members), that are useful to the OpenTelemetry

> community at large.

Reviewer 4: I recommend we reference the new [k8s distribution](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol-k8s) here instead

Author: @swiatekm-sumo In order to avoid confusion, I'd clarified the question to "If I enable `prometheusCR` in the Target Allocator, do I need the `PodMonitor` and `ServiceMonitor` CRs installed in my Kubernetes cluster?" Let me know what you think!

If you do need to reference a Target Allocator image from a private registry,
you’ll need to use `imagePullSecrets`. To use `imagePullSecrets` with the OTel
Operator, check out the instructions
[here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#using-imagepullsecrets).
Note that you don’t need to create a `serviceAccount` for the Target Allocator,
since once is already created for you automagically if you don’t create one
yourself (see
[Q6](#q6-do-i-need-to-create-a-service-account-to-use-the-target-allocator)).

For more info, check out the
[Target Allocator API docs](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollectorspectargetallocator).

### Q9: Is there a version lag between the OTel Operator auto-instrumentation and auto-instrumentation of supported languages?

If there is a lag, it's minimal, as maintainers try to keep these up to date for
each release cycle. Keep in mind that there are breaking changes in some
semantic conventions and the team is trying to avoid breaking users' code. More
info
[here](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C033BJ8BASU/p1713894678225579).

> ## Final Thoughts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Final thoughts
```

## Q&A

### Q1: Does the Operator support multiple Collector configuration sources?

Short answer: No.

Longer answer: OTel Collector can be fed more than one Collector config YAML
file. That way, you can keep your base configurations in, say,
`otelcol-config.yaml`, and overrides or additions to the base configuration can
go in, for example, `otelcol-config-extras.yaml`. See an example of this in the
[OTel Demo’s Docker compose file](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/blob/06f020c97f78ae9625d3a4a5d1107c55045c567f/docker-compose.yml#L665-L668).

Unfortunately, while the OTel Collector supports multiple Collector
configuration files, the Collector managed by the OTel Operator does not.

To get around this, you could merge the multiple Collector configs through some
external tool beforehand. For example, if you
[were deploying the Operator via Helm](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/tree/main/charts/opentelemetry-operator),
you could technically
[pass it multiple Collector config files using multiple --values flags](https://stackoverflow.com/a/56653384)
and let [Helm](https://helm.sh) do the merging for you.

> 

Reviewer 6: I wonder if it's worth mentioning that the operator would like to offer higher-level constructs for specifying configuration in the future: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/issues/1906. We'd really love to get more user feedback on that issue, so it'd be nice to give it more visibility via the blog post.

sensitive data, including access tokens stored as plain text.

Fortunately, the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR gives us a way to reference that
value as a secret. Here’s how you do it:

1- Create a Kubernetes secret for your access token. Remember to
[base-64 encode](https://www.base64encode.org/) the secret.

2-
[Expose the secret as an environment variable](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#using-a-secret)
by adding it to the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR’s
[`env` section](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/21e9643e28165e39bd79f3beec7f2b1f989d87e9/src/resources/02-otel-collector-ls.yml#L16-L21).
For example:

```yaml
env:
  - name: TOKEN_VALUE
    valueFrom:
      secretKeyRef:
        key: TOKEN_VALUE
        name: otel-collector-secret
```

3- Reference the environment variable in your
[exporter definition](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/21e9643e28165e39bd79f3beec7f2b1f989d87e9/src/resources/02-otel-collector-ls.yml#L43-L47):

```yaml
exporters:
  otlp:
    endpoint: '<your_backend_ndpoint_here>'
    headers:
      '<token_name>': '${TOKEN_VALUE}'
```

> For more info, check out my full example
> [here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/02-otel-collector-ls.yml),

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For more info, see the [full example](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/02-otel-collector-ls.yml),
```

> along with full instructions
> [here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#3b--kubernetes-deployment-servicenow-cloud-observability-backend).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
along with the [instructions](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#3b--kubernetes-deployment-servicenow-cloud-observability-backend).
```

Collector image with one that better suits your needs by `adding spec.image` to
your `OpenTelemetryCollector` YAML. In addition, you can also specify the number
of Collector replicas by adding `spec.replicas`. This is totally independent of
whether or not you override the Collector image.

Your code would look something like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otelcol
  namespace: mynamespace
spec:
  mode: statefulset
  image: <my_collector_image>
  replicas: <number_of_replicas>
```

Where:

- `<my_collector_image>` is the name of a valid Collector image from a container
  repository
- `<number_of_replicas>` is the number of pod instances for the underlying
  OpenTelemetry Collector

Keep in mind that if you're pulling a Collector image from a private container
registry, you'll need to use
[`imagePullSecrets`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/pull-image-private-registry/).
Since private container registries require authentication, this will enable you
to authenticate against that private registry. For more info on how to use

> `imagePullSecrets` for your Collector image, check out the instructions
> [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#using-imagepullsecrets).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`imagePullSecrets` for your Collector image, see [the instructions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#using-imagepullsecrets).
```

For more info, check out the
[OpenTelemetryCollector CR API docs](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollector).

### Q5: Does the Target Allocator work for all deployment types?

No. The Target Allocator only works for
[StatefulSet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/),
and
[DaemonSet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/)
([newly-introduced](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/pull/2430#discussion_r1420495631)).

> More info
> [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/aed905c2c3c0aa3fb608a79c2e4d0e7b73dff980/apis/v1beta1/collector_webhook.go#L328).

Reviewer 7: Oh, this URL is likely to age quickly. Anyhow ...

```suggestion
For more info, see 
[`collector_webhook.go`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/aed905c2c3c0aa3fb608a79c2e4d0e7b73dff980/apis/v1beta1/collector_webhook.go#L328).
```

### Q6: If I’m using Operator’s Target Allocator for Prometheus service discovery, do I need `PodMonitor` and `ServiceMonitor` CRs installed in my Kubernetes cluster?

Yes, you do. These CRs are bundled with the
[Prometheus Operator](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator);
however, they can be installed standalone, which means that you don’t need to
install the Prometheus Operator just to use these two CRs with the Target

> Allocator.

Reviewer 6: This is actually not correct. You need the CRs if you want to use them (duh), but you can also write raw Prometheus scrape configs using service discovery, and the target allocator will handle them correctly. You need to do this if you want to use the kinds of service discovery PodMonitors and ServiceMonitors don't support - for example if you want to scrape cAdvisor or kubelet metrics.

The answer to this question is already a bit complicated though, so maybe we should add a separate question for it? Unfortunately, "Prometheus service discovery" can have different meaning depending on context, and some readers may associate it purely with the CRs.

Author: @swiatekm-sumo I re-worded the question to be more specific to what I was trying to address: 

> If I enable `prometheusCR` in the Target Allocator, do I need the `PodMonitor` and `ServiceMonitor` CRs installed in my Kubernetes cluster?

What do you think?

The easiest way to install the
[`PodMonitor`](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.PodMonitor)
and
[`ServiceMonitor`](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.ServiceMonitor)
CRs is to grab a copy of the individual
[PodMonitor YAML](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/kube-prometheus-stack/charts/crds/crds/crd-podmonitors.yaml)
and
[ServiceMonitor YAML](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/kube-prometheus-stack/charts/crds/crds/crd-servicemonitors.yaml)
[custom resource definitions (CRDs)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/),
like this:

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/v0.71.2/example/prometheus-operator-crd/monitoring.coreos.com_servicemonitors.yaml

kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/v0.71.2/example/prometheus-operator-crd/monitoring.coreos.com_podmonitors.yaml
```

> Check out my example of the OpenTelemetry Operator’s Target Allocator with
> `ServiceMonitor`
> [here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#3b--kubernetes-deployment-servicenow-cloud-observability-backend).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
See my [example of the OpenTelemetry Operator’s Target Allocator with
`ServiceMonitor`](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#3b--kubernetes-deployment-servicenow-cloud-observability-backend).
```

No, but you do need to do a bit of extra work. So, here’s the deal…although you
need a
[service account](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/)
to use the Target Allocator, you don’t have to create your own.

If you enable the Target Allocator and don’t create a service account, one is
automagically created for you. This service account’s default name is a
concatenation of the Collector name (`metadata.name` in the
`OpenTelemetryCollector` CR) and `-collector`. For example, if your Collector is
called `mycollector`, then your service account would be called
`mycollector-collector`.

By default, this service account has no defined policy. This means that you’ll
still need to create your own
[`ClusterRole`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/#role-and-clusterrole)
and
[`ClusterRoleBinding`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/#rolebinding-and-clusterrolebinding),
and associate the `ClusterRole` to the `ServiceAccount` via
`ClusterRoleBinding`.

See the
[Target Allocator readme](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/tree/main/cmd/otel-allocator#rbac)

> for more on Target Allocator RBAC configuration.

Reviewer 6: I wonder if it's worth noting that we're planning to automate this fully in the near future. We already have it for some components, like the k8sprocessor, and there's an outstanding PR to do it automatically if the user gives the operator the necessary RBAC permissions to manage ClusterRoles and ClusterRoleBindings.

Author: Do you have a link to the PR @swiatekm-sumo?

Author: @swiatekm-sumo I've updated the text to reflect this. Do you have a link to the PR you mentioned above?

Author: Thanks! updated the post with the PR link!

Allocator’s base image, you can do so by adding `spec.targetAllocator.image` in
the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR. You can also specify the number of replicas by
adding `spec.targetAllocator.replicas`. This is totally independent of whether
or not you override the TA image.

Your code would look something like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otelcol
  namespace: mynamespace
spec:
  mode: statefulset
  targetAllocator:
    image: <ta_image_name>
    replicas: <number_of_replicas>
```

Where:

- `<ta_image_name>` is a valid Target Allocator image from a container
  repository.
- `<number_of_replicas>` is the number of pod instances for the underlying
  Target Allocator

### Q9: If it’s not recommended that you override the Target Allocator base image, then why would you want to?

One use case might be
[if you need to host a mirror of the Target Allocator image in your own private container registry for security purposes](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C033BJ8BASU/p1713894678225579).

If you do need to reference a Target Allocator image from a private registry,

> you’ll need to use `imagePullSecrets`. To use `imagePullSecrets` with the OTel
> Operator, check out the instructions
> [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#using-imagepullsecrets).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
you’ll need to use `imagePullSecrets`. For details, see [the instructions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#using-imagepullsecrets).
```

Note that you don’t need to create a `serviceAccount` for the Target Allocator,
since once is already created for you automagically if you don’t create one
yourself (see
[Q7](#q7-do-i-need-to-create-a-service-account-to-use-the-target-allocator)).

For more info, check out the
[Target Allocator API docs](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollectorspectargetallocator).

### Q10: Is there a version lag between the OTel Operator auto-instrumentation and auto-instrumentation of supported languages?

If there is a lag, it's minimal, as maintainers try to keep these up to date for
each release cycle. Keep in mind that there are breaking changes in some

> semantic conventions and the team is trying to avoid breaking users' code. More
> info
> [here](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C033BJ8BASU/p1713894678225579).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
semantic conventions and the team is trying to avoid breaking users' code. For details, see this 
[`#otel-operator` thread](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C033BJ8BASU/p1713894678225579).
```

---
title:
  Things You Might Not Have Known About the OpenTelemetry Operator - An OTel
  Operator Q&A
linkTitle: OTel Operator Q&A

> date: 2024-04-24

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2024-05-13
```

## Q&A

### Q1: Does the Operator support multiple Collector configuration sources?

Short answer: No.

Longer answer: OTel Collector can be fed more than one Collector config YAML
file. That way, you can keep your base configurations in, say,
`otelcol-config.yaml`, and overrides or additions to the base configuration can
go in, for example, `otelcol-config-extras.yaml`. See an example of this in the
[OTel Demo’s Docker compose file](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/blob/06f020c97f78ae9625d3a4a5d1107c55045c567f/docker-compose.yml#L665-L668).

Unfortunately, while the OTel Collector supports multiple Collector
configuration files, the Collector managed by the OTel Operator does not.

To get around this, you could merge the multiple Collector configs through some
external tool beforehand. For example, if you
[were deploying the Operator via Helm](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/tree/main/charts/opentelemetry-operator),
you could technically
[pass it multiple Collector config files using multiple --values flags](https://stackoverflow.com/a/56653384)
and let [Helm](https://helm.sh) do the merging for you.

> > **NOTE:** There are plans to offer higher-level constructs for sepcifying

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **NOTE:** There are plans to offer higher-level constructs for specifying
```
